Set after the events of Hitman: Blood Money, the game begins with Agent 47 (David Bateson) detailing his relationship with his handler Diana Burnwood (Marsha Thomason), whom he had trusted until she, without explanation, betrayed the International Contract Agency (ICA) by sabotaging their funding and database, using the subsequent confusion to vanish. After the ICA is reformed, 47 is tasked by his new handler, Benjamin Travis (Powers Boothe), a high level official within the ICA, to kill Diana for her betrayal and retrieve an important Agency asset, a teenage girl named Victoria (Isabelle Fuhrman), from her mansion in Chicago. 47 sneaks into the mansion and shoots Diana, but rather than finish her off, 47 comforts his dying friend and asks her why she betrayed the ICA. Diana explains that she had discovered Victoria was genetically-engineered to become an assassin for the ICA, and not wishing to see Victoria suffer the same fate as 47 she betrayed the ICA and escaped with her. As Diana's final request, 47 agrees to protect Victoria, for which Travis brands him a traitor.

After 47 drops Victoria off at the Rosewood Orphanage to hide, he contacts a disgraced Agency informant, Birdie (Steven Bauer), for information about Victoria and the ICA, which Birdie agrees to provide once 47 has assassinated a local crime boss (James Sie) in Chinatown for him. After cutting the barcode tattoo out of his head and giving his Silverballers to Birdie, 47 learns about a man named Blake Dexter (Keith Carradine), head of Dexter Industries, a home defense system company, who is staying at the Terminus Hotel and who has an interest in Victoria. 47 sneaks into the hotel and learns from a conversation between Dexter and his secretary Layla Stockton (Traci Lords) in the presidential suite that Dexter is planning to kidnap Victoria and sell her to the highest bidder. 47 tries to kill him, but is knocked out by Dexter's deformed bodyguard, Sanchez (Isaac C. Singleton Jr.). Realizing who 47 is, Dexter kills a hotel maid, frames 47, and leaves him to die after setting his suite on fire. 47 manages to escape the hotel, and is then hunted by the police. After escaping, Birdie sends him to kill Dexter's informant Dom Osmond (Jon Curry) at his strip club. Birdie then warns 47 that Dexter has hired thugs led by a mercenary named Edward Wade (Larry Cedar) to find him in order to discover Victoria's location. 47 heads to Chinatown and kills the men searching for Birdie, only to discover Birdie has already been captured, and immediately heads to the orphanage; Birdie then betrays 47 by revealing Victoria's location to Wade so that his life may be spared.

47 manages to kill Wade before he can escape with Victoria, but Lenny (Shane Stevens), Dexter's son, grabs her and leaves. Learning where to find Dexter from a matchbook found on Wade, 47 heads to the town of Hope in South Dakota, where Dexter rules the town with the help of the corrupt sheriff, Clive Skurky (Jon Gries), who is under the pay of his private military company. Retrieving his Silverballers from a local gun shop, 47 takes out Lenny's gang, the "Hope Cougars", who were planning to kidnap Victoria from Dexter and sell her to a rival weapons company. After interrogating Lenny over where Victoria is, 47 is given the option to either kill Lenny or leave him to die in the desert. Arriving at Dexter Industries HQ, 47 sneaks into the company's laboratory, kills the scientists who examined Victoria, and destroys their research data on her. After killing Sanchez in an underground cage fight, 47 recuperates at a hotel, but the hotel is attacked by an ICA strike team led by "The Saints", Travis's personal hit squad. 47 eliminates the Saints, including their leader, Lasandra Dixon. A furious Travis then heads to Hope with a large group of ICA operatives to kill 47 and find Victoria.

47 manages to find Victoria in the Hope Courthouse jail, but Skurky subdues him. As Dexter tortures 47, demanding to know where his son is, he is informed that Travis wants Victoria back in exchange for $10 million and leaves. 47 manages to escape into the streets of Hope, just as the ICA arrives to hunt him down. 47 pursues a wounded Skurky to a church where the sheriff tells 47 that Dexter is heading to Blackwater Park in Chicago before 47 kills him. In Chicago, Dexter and Travis attempt to exchange the money for Victoria, but the deal turns sour when Travis tries to renege on the deal and Dexter takes the money anyway. After reaching the top of Blackwater Park, 47 kills Layla and finally Dexter himself, after the latter had tried to escape with Victoria on a helicopter while ordering his men to blow up the building. Mortally wounded, Dexter laments the loss of his son and his money, leading a disgusted Victoria to throw the $10 million on his body before leaving with 47.